3GPP TS 23.501 V17.5.0 Release 17
System architecture for the 5G System (5GS)

5 System Architecture concepts

5.1 General concepts
The 5G System architecture is defined to support data connectivity and services enabling
deployments to use techniques such as Network Function virtualization and Software
Defined Networking. The 5G System architecture shall be service based.

5.2 Network Function

5.2.1 General
A Network Function (NF) is a processing function in a network which has defined functional
behaviour and defined interfaces. NFs can be implemented either as a network element on
a dedicated hardware, as a software instance running on dedicated hardware, or as a
virtualised function instantiated on an appropriate platform.

5.2.2 Access and Mobility Management Function (AMF)
The Access and Mobility Management Function (AMF) includes the following functionality.
Some of the functionality is supported in a single instance of the AMF: termination of RAN
CP interface (N2); termination of NAS (N1); NAS ciphering and integrity protection;
registration management; connection management; reachability management; mobility
management; lawful intercept for AMF events and interface to LI system; provision of
transport for SM messages between UE and SMF; access authentication; access authorization.
The AMF also includes network slice selection functionality.

5.2.3 Session Management Function (SMF)

5.2.3.1 Registration procedure
The Session Management Function (SMF) includes the following functionality. Session
Establishment, modification and release, including tunnel maintenance between UPF and
AN node. UE IP address allocation and management, including optional Authorization
functions. Selection and control of UP function, including controlling the UPF for proper
routing of traffic to the appropriate destination.
During the registration procedure with the 5G core network, the UE first sends a
Registration Request message over NAS to the AMF via the gNB. The AMF selects an SMF
if a PDU Session establishment is requested as part of registration, and forwards relevant
session management information to the selected SMF.

5.2.3.2 PDU Session establishment
The User Equipment (UE) initiates the PDU Session Establishment procedure by the
transmission of a PDU SESSION ESTABLISHMENT REQUEST message. The AMF, after
receiving the PDU Session Establishment Request from the UE, determines that the message
corresponds to a request for a new PDU Session and selects an SMF as described in clause
5.2.3.1. The SMF, upon reception of the message, may perform Secondary authorization or
authentication of the PDU session establishment.

5.2.4 User Plane Function (UPF)
The User Plane Function (UPF) includes the following functionality: anchor point for
Intra-/Inter-RAT mobility; external PDU session point of interconnect to Data Network;
packet routing and forwarding; packet inspection and User plane part of Policy rule
enforcement; traffic usage reporting.

5.3 Network Slicing

5.3.1 General concept
Network slicing allows the 5GS to support a wide variety of use cases which have partly
very diverse requirements, e.g. in the areas of functionality, performance and isolation.
A Network Slice is defined within a PLMN and shall include the Core Network Control
Plane and User Plane Network Functions.
